Project Abstract for January 23
================

Abstract
--------

Hybrid vigour or heterosis is the improved quality or trait in the offspring as a result of mixing the genetic contributions of its parents. As an illustration, broccoli have flowers that pack densely to form the head which is the main edible part of the plant. When breeding dissimilar strains of brocoli their offspring can form much larger heads of brocoli. [Li et al. 2018](https://bmcplantbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12870-018-1384-4) crossed parental lines and demonstrated heterosis in their offspring, shown in [figure 1](https://camo.githubusercontent.com/e51928dfa71bf6d08d808830a5ab5eb14d92de39/68747470733a2f2f73636f6e74656e742e66796b61312d312e666e612e666263646e2e6e65742f762f74312e302d392f34393231333430385f31303231383037373735373931363234315f323434303739383231373435383135353532305f6e2e6a70673f5f6e635f6361743d313131265f6e635f68743d73636f6e74656e742e66796b61312d312e666e61266f683d6436376132613165633534313537353935613733323064386362656433626333266f653d3543464230373446). In their study they used two sets of triads (two parent, one child) to clearly demonstrate heterosis. As a result the sample size is four parents and two offspring. However, despite the small sample size heterosis was clearly demonstrated in their offspring. Moreover, the parental lines were self-bred for six generations to produce confidently homozygous seed of one genetic background. For this reason, we believe that this data set is sound for analytical and statistical purposes.

The data transcriptomic and methylomic data associated with this paper can be found [online](https://static-content.springer.com/esm/art%3A10.1186%2Fs12870-018-1384-4/MediaObjects/12870_2018_1384_MOESM2_ESM.zip). We have also written a more functional [description](https://github.com/glenn-mcguinness/stat540FinalProject/blob/master/Data/data_description.md) of the data set for the purposes of our project.

**Is there differential expression between parents and offspring that are contributing to heterosis?** For our project, we will analyze Li et al's gene expression data to determine if the parents and children cluster independently or with each other. We will also check for differential expression between the parents and offspring to identify genes of interest related to heterosis. Because there are two backgrounds of parents, NKR and BRO, we will assess whether parental background is a factor. We can then group the differentially expressed genes based on GO annotations that are provided by the authors.

**To what degree could heterosis be regulated by epigenetics as seen through methylation data?** Once we identify genes that are expressed differentially between the parent and offspring, we will determine the relationship between methylation and expression using a differential methylation analysis.
